Modify rule S5283: Adapt to LaYC (#2787)
SonarSource/rspec: rules/S5283/cfamily/rule.adoc

> Creating a Variable Length Array (VLA) with a size that is not greater than zero leads to undefined behavior.

Reviewer: Shouldn't this be the same as the metadata title?

Author: This first setence in GUI is displayed just under the title. So usually this should be a quick explanation of the issue, and for someone who understands the topic should be enough to know what should be fixed.

== Why is this an issue?

Variable length arrays are used to allocate a stack size for the number of elements that are known at the runtime,
for example: 

[source,c]
----
void merge(int* tab, int size, int first) {
  int res[size]; // allocate buffer for merging on stack
  // merge the ranges [tab, tab + first) and [tab + first, tab + last) into res
  memcpy(tab, res, size * sizeof(int));

> }

Author: Ah, I see. I mean the comment to say that there is code here that perform merging. I will try to reformat that.

> }

Author: Updated

----

The syntax follows the one used by an array with static size (where size is constant),
and the value placed in the square brackets (`[size]` in the above example) determines the size of the array.
For both static and runtime-sized arrays, the size is required to be greater than zero,

> however, in the case of VLAs, this cannot be verified at compile-time, 

Author: Resolved a bit.

and any program that creates such an array with a size that has a value of zero or is negative, 
has undefined behavior.

[source,c]
----
void example() {
  int s = -1;
  int vla[s]; // program compiles, and have undefined behavior
  int arr[-1]; // program is ill-formed
}
----

This defect may also manifest when a variable used as size is not initialized and its value is not deterministic.
This may result in a negative or zero value being read from it in case of some program runs.
 
[source,c]
----
void uninitialized() {
  int s;      // uninitialized, the value is not determined
  int vla[s]; // program compiles, have undefined behavior if the value read from s is negative or zero
}
----

A non-positive size of the VLAs may also result from using a value loaded by the program from a file or other external resources used as size without previous validation.
Such values as usually referred to as being _tainted_.

[source,c]
----
void loadFromInput() {
  int size;

>   scanf("%d", &size); // loads size from input

Author: Good catch.

  char bytes[size]; // size may be negative
  /* ... */  
}
----

> The above code will lead to undefined behavior when the value of the `size` load from the input is not greater than zero.

Author: I think the ``++xx++`` syntax was used during automatic migration, as it is more bullet proof, but we prefer to use `xx` when this just works.

> The above code will lead to undefined behavior when the value of the `size` load from the input is not greater than zero.

Reviewer: I was referring to double backticks instead of single backticks. I was not referring to double backticks and double plus signs.
AFAIK the double plus sign makes the text emphasized. That is in combination with the inline code marker, results in emphasized inline-code AFAIK.

According to the [ref](https://docs.asciidoctor.org/asciidoc/latest/text/monospace/#unconstrained), it seems like single and double backticks both result in _monoscaped_ font, but the single backtick version only works if it's not in the middle of the word.

> This may happen due to source data corruption, accidental user mistake, or malicious action. 

Author: Reading corrupted data, may be caused by both source data corruption (you are reading the right files, but they got accidentally corrupted), or user mistake, where the wrong file was given. I was using source data corruption, to indicate that you program may stop working, because the file got accidentally changed.

=== What is the potential impact?

Creating a variable length array with a size smaller or equal to zero causes undefined behavior.
This means the compiler is not bound by the language standard anymore, and your program has no meaning assigned to it.

Practically this can lead to a wide range of effects and may lead to the following:

* crashes, in particular segmentation faults, when the program access memory that it is not allowed to,
* memory corruption and data losses, when the program overwrites bytes responsible for storing data or executable code,
* stack overflow, when negative size is interpreted as a large positive number.

Furthermore, in a situation when VLA size is dependent on the user input, it can lead to vulnerabilities in the program. 

== How to fix it

Ensure that the size of the variable length array is always greater than zero.
In case of value that depends on user input (is _tainted_), include appropriate checks to ensure that value is positive

> before using it as size for VLA.

Author: VLAs avoid memory allocations, and thus can be used in embedded. Also they avoid any allocations. I would be not comfortable with saying that if you decide to use them, vector is viable alternative.

=== Code examples

==== Noncompliant code example

[source,cpp]
----
void directly() {
}

void f1() {
  int n;
  int a[n]; // Noncompliant; n is undefined
}

----

=== Pitfalls

// Review question: mentions that large VLA may lead to stack overflow, and there is no way for a program to reject
// allocation. In this case, using a heap may be better. However, this is not related to a problem in the rule.

> // and does not avoid it.

Reviewer: Maybe then this should be in "extra mile"?
I definitely think it should be mentioned.

Author: Hmm, I think I see now where you were going with using the extra mile here, will try to do that.

Author: Done. Let me know what you think.

== Resources

=== Documentation

> * C++ reference - https://en.cppreference.com/w/c/language/array#Variable-length_arrays[Variable length arrays]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* {cpp} reference - https://en.cppreference.com/w/c/language/array#Variable-length_arrays[Variable length arrays]
```
I think I've seen it written this way.

However, according to grep, it's not entirely consistent.
We have:
```
{cpp} reference - https  <--- most frequent
CPP reference - https
C++ reference - https
CPP reference/C++ reference - https
C{plus}{plus} reference - https
```

Author: I will change it to {cpp} reference.

> Creating a Variable Length Array (VLA) with a size that is not greater than zero leads to undefined behavior.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Creating a Variable Length Array (VLA) with a size that is not greater than zero is to undefined behavior.
```

== Why is this an issue?

Variable length arrays are used to allocate a stack size for the number of elements that are known at the runtime,
for example: 

[source,c]
----
void merge(int* tab, int size, int first) {
  int res[size]; // allocate buffer for merging on stack
  /* Code that merges two sorted ranges [tab, tab + first) and [tab + first, tab + last)
   * into res buffer.
   * ....
   */
  // copy merged data into input
  memcpy(tab, res, size * sizeof(int));
}
----

> The syntax follows the one used by an array with static size (where size is constant),

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The syntax follows the one used by an array with static size (where size is a constant),
```

and the value placed in the square brackets (`[size]` in the above example) determines the size of the array.
For both static and runtime-sized arrays, the size is required to be greater than zero.
However, in the case of VLAs, this cannot be checked by the compiler, 
and any program that creates such an array with a size that has a value of zero or is negative, 
has undefined behavior.

[source,c]
----
void example() {
  int s = -1;
  int vla[s];  // program compiles, and have undefined behavior
  int arr[-1]; // program is ill-formed
}
----

> This defect may also manifest, when the variable used as size is not initialized, and its value is not deterministic.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This defect may also manifest when the variable used as size is not initialized.
```

> This may result in a negative or zero value being read from it in case of some runs of the program.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Uninitialized variables might have zero, negative, or any value at each time the program executes.
```

[source,c]
----
void uninitialized() {
  int s;      // uninitialized, the value is not determined
  int vla[s]; // program compiles, have undefined behavior if the value read from s is negative or zero
}
----

A non-positive size of the VLAs may also result from using a value loaded by the program from a file or other external resources used as size without previous validation.
Such values as usually referred to as being _tainted_.

[source,c]
----
void loadFromInput() {
  int size = -1;
  scanf("%d", &size); // loads size from input
  char bytes[size];   // size may be negative
  /* ... */
}
----

The above code will lead to undefined behavior when the value of the `size` load from the input is not greater than zero.
This may happen due to source data corruption, accidental user mistake, or malicious action. 

=== What is the potential impact?

> Creating a variable length array with a size smaller or equal to zero causes undefined behavior.

Reviewer: This sentence is really similar to the very first line.
However, it uses the verb "causes", while in the headline it uses "leads to".
And I proposed already "is" for this.
We should consider harmonizing these.

This means the compiler is not bound by the language standard anymore, and your program has no meaning assigned to it.

Practically this can lead to a wide range of effects and may lead to the following:

* crashes, in particular segmentation faults, when the program access memory that it is not allowed to,
* memory corruption and data losses, when the program overwrites bytes responsible for storing data or executable code,
* stack overflow, when negative size is interpreted as a large positive number.

Furthermore, in a situation when VLA size is dependent on the user input, it can lead to vulnerabilities in the program. 

== How to fix it

Ensure that the size of the variable length array is always greater than zero.
In case of value that depends on user input (is _tainted_), include appropriate checks to ensure that value is positive
before using it as size for VLA.

=== Code examples

==== Noncompliant code example

Zero size VLA is created due of by-one error.

[source,c,diff-id=1,diff-type=noncompliant]
----
void zeroSize() {

>   int array[5];

Reviewer: Why do we need the "array" object in these examples?
I don't see them referred anywhere.

Author: Removed

The above code will lead to undefined behavior when the value of the `size` load from the input is not greater than zero.
This may happen due to source data corruption, accidental user mistake, or malicious action. 

=== What is the potential impact?

Creating a variable length array with a size smaller or equal to zero causes undefined behavior.
This means the compiler is not bound by the language standard anymore, and your program has no meaning assigned to it.

Practically this can lead to a wide range of effects and may lead to the following:

* crashes, in particular segmentation faults, when the program access memory that it is not allowed to,
* memory corruption and data losses, when the program overwrites bytes responsible for storing data or executable code,
* stack overflow, when negative size is interpreted as a large positive number.

Furthermore, in a situation when VLA size is dependent on the user input, it can lead to vulnerabilities in the program. 

== How to fix it

Ensure that the size of the variable length array is always greater than zero.
In case of value that depends on user input (is _tainted_), include appropriate checks to ensure that value is positive

> before using it as size for VLA.

Reviewer: Maybe also add that it's not enough to ensure that it's greater than zero, but also that it shouldn't be too large. This is even more so important for tainted sizes.

=== Code examples

==== Noncompliant code example

Zero size VLA is created due of by-one error.

[source,c,diff-id=1,diff-type=noncompliant]
----
void zeroSize() {
  int array[5];
  for (int i = 0; i <= 5; ++i) {
    int buffer[5 - i]; // Noncompliant: buffer size is zero for last iteration
    /* ... */
  }
}
----

==== Compliant solution

[source,c,diff-id=1,diff-type=compliant]
----
void zeroSize() {
  int array[5];
  for (int i = 0; i < 5; ++i) {
    int buffer[5 - i]; // Complaint
    /* ... */
  }
}
----

==== Noncompliant code example

Size is not initialized in one of code paths.

[source,c,diff-id=2,diff-type=noncompliant]
----
int countGrapheneClusters(int codeUnits, int bytesInCodeUnit) {
  int size;
  if (bytesInCodeUnit > 0) {
    size = codeUnits * bytesInCodeUnit;
  }
  char buffer[size]; // Noncomplaint: size may not be initialized
  // .... 
  return  0;
}
----

==== Compliant solution

[source,c,diff-id=2,diff-type=compliant]
----
int countGrapheneClusters(int codeUnits, int bytesInCodeUnit) {
  int size;
  if (bytesInCodeUnit > 0) {
    size = codeUnits * bytesInCodeUnit;
  } else {
    return -1;
  }

>   char buffer[size]; // Noncomplaint: size may not be initialized

Reviewer: The comments suggest it's noncompliant, while the section should contain only compliant solutions.

  // .... 
  return  0;
}
----

==== Noncompliant code example

[source,c,diff-id=3,diff-type=noncompliant]
----
int taintedSize() {
  int size = 0;

>   scanf("%d", &size); // size value is loaded from input, value is tainted here
>   char bytes[size]; // Noncomplaint: size may be negative

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  scanf("%d", &size); // size value is loaded from input, value is tainted here
  char bytes[size];   // Noncomplaint: size may be negative
```

  /* ... */
  return 0;
}
----

==== Compliant solution

Validate value of `size` before using as size of array.

[source,c,diff-id=3,diff-type=compliant]
----
int taintedSize() {
  int size = 0;
  scanf("%d", &size);

>   if (size <= 0) {
>     return -1;
>   }

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  if (size <= 0 || size > 1000) {
    return -1;
  }
```
For tainted values, it's recommended to check both lower and upper bounds.

  char bytes[size]; // Complaint: size is never negative
  /* ... */
  return 0;
}
----

== Going the extra mile

Variable length arrays are allocated on the stack, so in situations when a large value of the size is used,
creating such an array may lead to stack overflow and undefined behavior:
 
[source,c]
----
void largeVLA() {
  usinged int s = INT_MAX;
  int vla[s][100]; // requires allocation of the INT_MAX * 100

> }

Reviewer: I'm not sure about this code.
I'd suggest to use `int` for `s`. It would make it clear, that the subsequent multiplication for calculating the size of the array is not expected to wrap-around.
I'm not sure about the semantics, but seeing `unsigned` definitely caught my attention; which shouldn't be the point.

Author: Good catch. `unsigned` was leftover from previous attempt when I used `-1` to initialize.

Author: Fixed

----

In addition, the language does not provide a way to query available stack space, nor the possibility of reporting failure in the creation of such an array.

When applicable, it is recommended to replace the VLA with heap-allocated memory. 
In contrast to VLA, heap allocation functions report in a situation when sufficient memory cannot be provided, by returning `NULL` or throwing an exception (in {cpp}).

> Furthermore, {cpp} standard library provides a container like `std::vector`, that handles management of such heap allocated memory.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Furthermore, the {cpp} standard library provides containers like `std::vector`, that manage the heap-allocated memory.
```

> Moreover, the C11 language standard made support for declaring VLA on stack optional (with `__STDC_NO_VLA__`),
> and C++ standard does not support them, however, they are commonly supported as extensions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Moreover, the C11 language standard and above only optionally supports VLAs (with `__STDC_NO_VLA__`),
and the {cpp} standard never supported it, however, they are commonly accepted as extensions.
```

It felt a bit too "passive" to me.

== Resources

=== Documentation

> * {cpp} reference - https://en.cppreference.com/w/c/language/array#Variable-length_arrays[Variable length arrays]

Reviewer: Why is "Variable" in upper case?

Author: This is title of the section on the page. I will add hypen for exact match,.

Creating a variable length array with a size smaller or equal to zero causes undefined behavior.
This means the compiler is not bound by the language standard anymore, and your program has no meaning assigned to it.

Practically this can lead to a wide range of effects and may lead to the following:

* crashes, in particular segmentation faults, when the program access memory that it is not allowed to,
* memory corruption and data losses, when the program overwrites bytes responsible for storing data or executable code,
* stack overflow, when negative size is interpreted as a large positive number.

Furthermore, in a situation when VLA size is dependent on the user input, it can lead to vulnerabilities in the program. 

== How to fix it

Ensure that the size of the variable length array is always greater than zero.
In case of value that depends on user input (is _tainted_), include appropriate checks to ensure that value is positive
before using it as size for VLA.

=== Code examples

==== Noncompliant code example

Zero size VLA is created due of by-one error.

[source,cpp,diff-id=1,diff-type=noncompliant]
----
void zeroSize() {
  int array[5];
  for (int i = 0; i <= 5; ++i) {

>     int buffer[5 - i]; // Noncompliant: buffer size is zero for i == 5

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    int buffer[5 - i]; // Noncompliant: buffer size is zero for the 5th iteration
```
Maybe even "last" iteration, because that is an even stronger statement.

Author: This is 6th iteration, not 5th, because of off by one error. I will use last.

    /* ... */
  }
}
----

==== Compliant solution

> [source,cpp,diff-id=1,diff-type=noncompliant]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[source,cpp,diff-id=1,diff-type=compliant]
```

----
void zeroSize() {
  int array[5];
  for (int i = 0; i < 5; ++i) {
    int buffer[5 - i]; // Complaint
    /* ... */
  }
}
----

> ==== Noncompliant code example

Reviewer: Is it deliberate that this section title is mentioned for the second time?
I thought we should have a single noncompliant section, where we could have multiple code snippets, and a single "compliant" section, where the correct code snippets are.

Author: Yes. I understood that this is the case now, when we pair examples by repeating complaints and non-compliant solutions. I.e. each orthogonal example can have separate pair.
We already done so here: https://sonarsource.github.io/rspec/#/S5553

> [source,cpp,diff-id=1,diff-type=noncompliant]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[source,cpp,diff-id=2,diff-type=noncompliant]
```

----
int taintedSize() {
  int size = 0;
  scanf("%d", &size); // size value is loaded from input, value is tainted here
  char bytes[size]; // Noncomplaint: size may be negative
  /* ... */
  return 0;
}
----

==== Compliant solution

Validate value of `size` before using as size of array.

> [source,cpp,diff-id=1,diff-type=noncompliant]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[source,cpp,diff-id=2,diff-type=compliant]
```
